Ladies and gentlemen, please welcome
Carbon Technology Manager David Wright.
Thank you very much.
Welcome to session 130,
"Carbon-- The Lower Levels." Oh, OK.
I didn't see that title.
Carbon, low level in the book.
Wow, I'm really excited to see
how many of y'all made it.
I know that lots of questions that
are going to be answered in this
session were asked during previous
Q&As during the rest of the week.
And I told you guys to keep coming here,
and you did, so I'm really glad.
And then it's mixed with sadness,
because this is the last
session of the conference,
so it's kind of weird.
Ooh, I know.
It's like Christmas ending.
Well, for me, anyway.
I don't know.
Has it been a good
conference for you guys?
I sure hope so.
Yeah.
I'm so glad.
Great.
We have so much information to get out,
and I'm so glad you
were here to receive it.
We've certainly received
a lot of good feedback.
Have a lot to go back to Apple with
and work on to make bringing your
applications to 10 a lot easier.
So anyway,
let's nail down the final details of
what's involved for you as you bring
your applications to 10 by Carbonite.
We're going to have a
little bit of a chat.
We're going to have a little
bit of a chat with the team.
Good afternoon.
Wow.
Glad everyone can make it on
5:00 on a Friday afternoon.
So I'm going to take you through,
as it says, Carbon Lower Levels.
It's a pretty generic term,
starting with a slide that I'm
sure everyone here has seen.
Anyone here not seen this slide yet?
Here there's alternative
designs up on the web.
Core Services.
Okay.
The technologies that I'm going to
go through today are actually part
of this box called Core Services.
It's a little confusing because
when we initially had a lot of
these technologies up and running,
they were part of the Carbon runtime,
specifically.
They were part of the Carbon stack,
if you will.
And what's happened over
time is we've seen that
We have some similar services
that are available in all stacks,
and we decided to factor these lower
into the system and actually share them.
And that's why you'll see some
familiar-looking technologies
down in the core services layer.
The other thing that you may not
have noticed when you saw this kind
of slide in other presentations is
Well,
the first thing you probably did notice
is it's an architectural diagram.
It's a layer diagram trying
to describe the system.
But it's also real in that it
corresponds to the frameworks
that we have on Mac OS X.
Just to make sure we're
all on the same page here,
framework is a term that's
being bandied about a lot.
It really tends to be used in the same
way in which you'd say shared library.
Other folks call this a DILIB.
A framework is really a
collection of files and folders
grouped around a shared library.
It includes headers.
It might include the resources for this.
And I'll talk about
frameworks quite a bit.
So if you are one of those
folks who has actually installed
DP4 on your PowerBooks,
and you look in,
System Library Frameworks,
that's where we keep most of
the frameworks on the system.
In particular, you should note there,
there's one framework
called Core Services.
Core Services is the lowest framework in
the system above the system framework,
or the Darwin layer.
And it is intended for...
Tools and processes that
would use the system in a way,
but probably not use
any graphic services,
not use any UI.
An example of things that use
core services is the res tool
that we have on the system you
see running in Project Builder.
Okay, so there's a lot of things
that are in core services.
I'm not going to go over all of them.
I'm just going to go over a subset.
You should notice here that
most of the things that are in
core services are things that
don't deal with UI or graphics.
In cases where it seems
like that's not the case,
for example, say the alias manager when
it brings up a dialogue,
or some UI associated
with the NSL manager,
what we've actually done there is
factored that out of core services into
a framework above that in an upper layer,
typically application services
or even Carbon or Cocoa.
So what am I actually going
to talk about in this session?
This subset of technologies.
And basically this list here is kind of
roughly in chronological order as you
would bring an application up from when
you double-click in the finder and that
gets launched via the process manager.
I will be going through these
technologies and kind of
giving you an update on what's
been happening with them,
but I'll also be looking at some of the
things that are unique about them on 10.
In particular,
I'm going to be highlighting some
of the core services design goals.
Performance is kind of a constant
theme that we've seen throughout most
of the core services technologies.
Almost all of the slides to follow
will have some aspect of performance,
some impact of performance.
Scalability and extensibility
are essential for these services,
mostly because they are
factored low in the system.
It really is essential to have
these qualities at that level so
that higher levels that build upon
them can take advantage of that.
Stability is one of the
major points of Mac OS X.
That's both from the point
of view of looking at the
APIs that are in this layer,
but also from the point of view
of making sure the system itself,
the actual underlying implementations
of the technology are stable.
Thread safety, this layer,
this core services layer,
is the foundation for our
There will be a slide later on
exactly what services are thread-safe,
and I'll speak about that a
little bit when we get to those.
This slide should look a bit
familiar from the Carbon overview.
I just wanted to stress that there
are lots of different application
environments that are taking
advantage of and using core services,
including the classic environment,
which runs all-in-one address space,
Carbon apps, Java apps.
Java apps are a little bit different
in that they may not actually use
core services and Carbon things
until they actually use a UI,
so they're kind of a little
bit more dynamic that way.
Cocoa apps are somewhat similar,
but there are some foundation
technologies in core services
that are used across the board.
Okay, so now I'm going to get into
the technologies proper,
starting with code loading.
I don't think it's a secret.
You've pretty much heard the terms
throughout the conference so far.
We do have two code loading
mechanisms on Mac OS X.
From an architectural point of view,
this isn't something
that we set out to do,
that we design.
This isn't something that's necessarily
Something we put on our list,
we need two code loading architectures.
The contrary,
it would simplify things to some
degree to actually just have one,
especially in the areas of tools.
However, what we were faced with
when we started OS X,
we're talking about
Carbon in the early days,
we had a system that was
predominantly a mock-o system.
The terminology there is
the dynamic loader or DYLD,
and it knows about these
mock-o shared libraries,
which we refer to as Dylibs.
We thought about it for a little
while and actually went into a
certain amount of analysis on how
much cost we would incur to change
over to a whole new set of tools.
At that point in time,
we had other things that
we were planning on.
For example, if you'll remember,
two years back,
we were just then talking about
changing the microkernel from
the earlier version of Mach.
What we basically decided is that we
did not need a whole sweeping change
like this throughout the entire system.
This was key.
For me,
I've been at Apple for a very long time.
This was one of those decisions
that really was instrumental in
letting us continue to develop and
continue to have a live system.
That's why you have DP 1, 2, 3,
and now 4.
Because we made decisions
like this at that time.
It's not ideal from a
technical point of view,
but it is the right compromise.
It's giving us pretty much
the best of both worlds.
We have a CFM world now that's very good,
and I'll get into that
a little bit later,
and the mock-o world that
we kind of started from.
Okay, just again on the terminology,
because I know this can be confusing,
the way you talk about the
kind of output file format of
the shared libraries for CFM,
those are PEF shared libraries,
and in general, we refer to the mock-oath
shared libraries as DILIBs.
Okay,
so to go along with the code loading,
There are differences that
you'll find if you're developing
Mako and CFM applications
that are interesting to note.
For CFM, as you're already familiar with,
you end up using dummy libraries
to link your application.
This gives you the important
information of what libraries you
need to get symbols from and what
the name of those symbols are.
After you've linked your
application and you actually run it,
the CodeFragment Manager makes sure
and ensures that at launch time,
right when you start your application up,
that all of those libraries that you
need and all of those symbols that you
need are present right then and there.
It's kind of flip-flop
with DYLD and Mako.
Linking an application,
a Mako application,
all of your libraries and all of
the libraries that they depend on
have to be available at link time.
And that's primarily because
Mako supports what we refer to as
lazy initialization at runtime.
So, let me go through a scenario here.
You have an application,
you link a Mako application, you link it,
everything's good,
and then you're going along
and running on a system,
and all of a sudden,
some symbol that you need is missing
because you inadvertently removed
that framework from the system.
That is something that
can actually happen.
That is by design with
the code loader on a...
[Transcript missing]
I will get to what we've done
with CFM there that actually
kind of compromises between the
two when I get to that slide.
And then the other thing that
I want to make sure is clear,
as of right now in DB4,
we still do not have support
for two-level namespace in DYLD.
We're working on it.
We expect to have it for the public beta.
But the basic problem there
is that we have a big,
flat namespace,
and we have some tools that you
may have seen here in performance
talks and things like that that
actually rely on that flat namespace.
So we're trying to figure out a way that
we can actually preserve that investment
in tools and move forward to a bi-level
namespace that we know you need for
your plugins and your shared libraries.
Okay, to go with the two code
loading mechanisms we have,
two runtimes.
They are very similar,
kind of at a high level.
The real difference is what
gets passed around when you're
looking at the assembly code,
particularly in terms of
what a function pointer is.
A function pointer in the CFM runtime,
sometimes referred to as a TOC runtime,
a function pointer is really a
pointer to a little bit of memory.
It has a function address, you know,
the code address, and another word that's
used for data offsets.
In Mach-O, you actually have a function,
a function pointer is a
pointer to the code itself.
[Transcript missing]
And that brings us to Mixed Mode.
The differences that we have between
the two runtimes are actually dealt
with in a slight change to the Mixed
Mode that you probably know and
use regularly in Mac OS in general.
So basically what we did with Mixed
Mode is we changed from macros in
the headers to actual function calls.
And this was because we had these
two different runtimes to support.
And this is key to having a
single CFM application binary
that can run on both OS 8,
9, and 10.
The differences come in when
you do a new or a disposed UPP.
And that's when we actually take into
account the differences in between
how you pass code addresses around.
At invoke time,
it's essentially the same.
Specifically,
the way that all gets invoked in
your application is you link your
CFM application with CarbonLib.
The CarbonLib that lives on OS X has this
little bit of glue that gets you from
kind of a CFM world to the Mach-O world.
"That Carbon lib that's on 10
is different in that regard than
the Carbon lib that's on 8 or 9."
Okay, now onto the memory model
that we have in OS X.
This slide really is about
what's not in the memory model.
You notice right at the top of the list,
I'm sure you've heard this before,
but there's no low mem.
The region corresponding to low
mem is actually not even mapped.
So if you access it, you'll take a fault,
crash,
or you'll break into your debugger.
That's by design.
That's one of the key differences
that helps with stability.
It helps with cases where you
have code you're unintentionally
dereferencing nil or looking at low mem
addresses and getting something that
sometimes is valid and sometimes isn't,
because sometimes it's the last thing
you wrote there or sometimes it's
something that somebody else wrote there.
This is one whole area of
instability on the traditional
Mac OS that we just don't have on 10.
And that actually brings
me to a good point.
This is one of the real important
reasons why you have to take your
applications and try them out on 10.
You have to qualify
your applications on 10.
We're not saying that something that
is perfect on 9 linking to CarbonLib
is going to run unchanged on 10.
As a matter of fact,
I would say the opposite.
I would say that if
you run your app on 10,
you're probably going
to have a better app,
a more stable app, that is very likely to
run unmodified on 9.
Okay, so what else do you
see in this memory map,
or what else don't you see?
Well, there's no system heap.
There's no globally allocatable
memory whose address you
can rely on being around,
who exists beyond the
lifespan of the application.
That again is a stability issue.
I'll get to that a little bit more
when we talk about shared memory.
No process manager heap.
It's really unnecessary.
The tempmem functions that you may
be familiar with are just mapped to
the same as the non-tempmem versions.
A handle, whether it's a tempmemory
handle or just a new handle,
end up being the same thing.
And then...
Well,
you don't have any other kind of heap.
You don't have to worry about zones.
And this is all mostly motivated
by performance reasons and working
better on a world where you actually
have a very large address space,
like we do on 10.
And then,
no direct device access is another
thing that kind of comes with the map,
the memory map.
So what do you have in
the memory map on 10?
First thing of note that helps
out a lot with performance,
particularly performance of the system,
is code and read-only data being shared.
These sections, from a VM point of view,
code and read-only data that are shared,
are the best kind of sharing that we
have on the system because basically
they're backed by wherever the
original data and code came from.
In the case of the system,
most of the code and data
you're talking about is coming
from individual frameworks.
And it's basically only
in one place on disk,
and it's shared and mapped into every
address space that needs to use it.
In addition,
other things that you'll find in
your address space are going to be:
Well, towards the beginning
of the address space,
you'll find code and
data of your application.
You'll find a stack for your main thread.
You'll find more than one
thread running on OS X.
It's likely you'll find on the order of
a couple in DP4 running your application.
Each one of these threads has their
own stack surrounded by guard pages.
That deals with issues like flowing
under or over the stack size.
Stacks are very large.
I believe right now they're
set at half a megabyte.
That's something we have to
look at and tune correctly.
In general, we're talking about a
very sparse address space.
Lots of space,
lots of holes in the address space.
It's discontinuous.
The reason I'm going into that
is that you shouldn't assume
anything about that address space.
You will find, if you're sitting there
probing in the debugger,
you will find a certain
amount of determinism.
You'll see certain things
loaded at the same address.
But that's not necessarily the case.
Because of the dynamicity of
the dynamic loader and CFM,
you will find things on
the first run of the app.
You'll find certain things loaded,
code or data, at a certain address and
then do this very same thing.
And because between the two
times something else got loaded,
you won't be loaded in the same address.
So don't make any assumptions
about where you'll be loaded.
Then the other thing
I'd like to point out,
more on a practical note,
if you're looking at DP4,
there's two command line tools that
really help you get a good grasp on this.
The first one is just size.
And basically size,
when given a path to a shared
library or an application,
will tell you the sections that
your shared library application has.
Things like how big your code is,
how big your data sections are,
what portion of those are read-only,
what portion are read-write.
One of the things that we hit a lot
as we brought code over from OS 8
is we had lots of data sections
that were marked as writable,
which meant that they
really didn't get shared.
And that was simply a matter of,
in the code, saying that these were
constant data sections.
At that point, they became read-only
and were fully shared.
That optimization is something
I would look at with your own shared
libraries and your own applications.
The other tool is VM Map,
which takes as an argument
either the name or the PID of
the process that is running.
And this gives you a snapshot,
if you will, of a running process.
And there should be a one-to-one
correspondence between a size and VM Map.
I shouldn't say a one-to-one.
Everything that you see in size
you should see in the VM map.
You will also in VM maps see
the size of other things that
are in your address space,
other frameworks that you're using.
You should be able to see
read-only and read-write
sections in there fairly clearly.
In talking to the tools folks,
there's an internal tool that works
where you didn't get ready for DP4,
but it's basically a UI that lets
you see this so you don't have to
actually use command line tools.
I thought I'd bring that up
in case you're looking at
these kinds of things in DP4.
Okay, so now we know about memory maps,
but what does this actually mean to you
when you're doing memory allocation?
Well, the first thing is
Memory Manager in general is fully
supported on both pointer-based,
handle-based objects.
And I think what you have to keep
in mind here is that this is one
of these areas where we have some
APIs in the Memory Manager that
make sense on 8 and 9,
that don't make sense on 10.
They're still part of Carbon,
so you can write a single binary.
The best example of this
is the free mem call.
There isn't really a good
answer for that on 10.
We could tell you there's four gigabytes.
We could tell you there's half that.
It's not really something
that makes sense when you
have a sparse address space.
And that's why we came up with the
Gestalt Memory Map Sparse Selector.
That's what you should check
when you're wondering whether
you need to ask these questions,
whether you're wondering
whether you really have to
police your memory allocation.
Some other differences that kind
of fall into this boat is purging.
[Transcript missing]
So this is actually a counterpoint
to what I said earlier about
where you should qualify your app,
because this is an area that you could
have something that runs fine on 10.
And you write some new code and you
don't lock your handle and you never
set handle size so that you can
dereference that without a problem
and you'll never find a bug on 10.
But take that same code and
move it back to 8 or 9 and you
likely will find a problem.
And that's because 8 or 9 has a limited,
you know, fixed-size application heap.
The other thing I want
to address on is kind of,
we spent quite a bit of time trying
to understand the performance
of memory allocation on 10.
And one of the things we found
is that the assumptions are
almost reversed in a sense.
The memory manager on 8 and 9
made a very explicit design decision
to favor handles over pointers.
That was the right decision at the time
because we did have a fixed size heap.
Basically, the reverse is true on 10.
In a VM-based system like 10
with sparse address spaces,
The most basic representation
for memory is a pointer.
One of the things that kind
of sounds counter-intuitive,
but I really encourage you to do,
is to try to get your code set up so that
you basically refrain from doing any kind
of sub-allocation that you may be doing.
It's very typical in
your OS 8 and 9 code.
The reason being here is that a
lot of the tools on OS X depend on
you using malloc directly or new
pointer and new handle directly.
The tools have been revved to understand
those two packages for memory allocation
and the tools I'm talking about are
going to help you find things like leaks,
they're going to help you find
cases where you've overwritten
a block of memory underwritten.
And this has all kind of gone over in
one of the performance tool sessions.
But the point here is that at least in
a debug version of your app you want
to have your memory allocation factored
so that it calls one of these routines
directly so you can use the tools.
The other thing I would
encourage you to do is
Do some measurements of your
application and see what they're
like just with the system allocator.
Either malloc directly,
and you probably should look at
malloc if you don't rely on any of the
uh features of the memory manager with
regards to pointers and handles and
recovering handles and things like
that if you're going to be interacting
with handle based apis in the toolbox
of course you're required to use
handles there but for your own internal
allocation needs start off try malloc
there's a there's a big advantage
to actually all of us using the same
allocator and it actually is not
something you typically see unless you're
looking at the overall system performance
the problem we initially had when we
brought off brought over large subsystems
early on in the Carbon effort on
os10 was we had a lot of sub allocation
going on every big subsystem had their
own memory allocation and the problem
with that is that we have essentially
different high water marks in every
subsystem that has allocations and that
meant that we didn't really do a good job
as a whole of get getting rid of memory
and freeing it up in a timely sense.
Take a look at that.
If you have issues specifically
with malloc and its performance,
both size and speed,
let us know because we want
malloc to be the system allocator.
We want it to be as fast as possible.
We want it to be as
efficient in terms of speed.
I'm sorry, in terms of size.
And that actually brings
me to another point,
which is the problems we've
been dealing with in terms of
performance and allocation have
largely been size problems,
not speed problems.
And I think that's going to be
the case with your applications
and your shared libraries as well.
It's not just a matter of having a
big sparse address space and being
able to allocate a lot of memory,
but
It's a matter of actually being
able to account for your space and
understand the relationship between
things that get allocated underneath
a system framework compared to what
you really intended to do above it.
So, again,
take a look at that if you have
really good reasons or really good
Performance observations,
please share those with us because
we really want to understand why you
would think of doing something other
than using malloc on this system.
Lastly, there's an issue that
came up late in DP4.
We didn't get a fix in for it.
Basically,
one of the changes we were doing
to the memory manager to enable
additional debugging support ended us
up with a memory manager that doesn't
allocate on a 16-byte boundary.
In particular,
this is important for AlteVec
or Velocity Engine data,
which ignores some of the lower bits.
So if you run into that situation,
there's a release note on DP4 with
a workaround on how to do that,
essentially copying the memory out.
We'll fix this for the user beta.
Okay, shared memory.
This one has quite a story to it too.
So, you know,
early on in Carbon we basically said,
new pointer sys and the system heap,
they have to go,
there's stability problems around them,
they're being used way too much,
they're used between
extensions and applications,
and those things don't essentially
have the same counterparts on OS X.
We really looked at this closely,
and we listened to some of
the developers that wanted,
that really knew what they wanted
out of a shared memory system,
they wanted particular features.
And after a lot of consideration,
what we ended up with is saying,
you know,
the features that most developers want
in this area are completely covered
by the POSIX shared memory APIs,
and it really makes no sense to try
to come up with a system that works on
both 9 and 10 regarding shared memory.
The two systems in this
area are quite different.
The single address space versus
multi-address space nature of
the systems makes it really hard
to kind of abstract that away.
This is something that
we're trying to do.
Yeah.
that you have to be aware of if
you're dealing with shared memory.
And then, of course,
to use shared memory safely,
you have to synchronize,
and that's what the
POSIX semaphores are for.
Those are fully documented
on the DP4 release.
The shared memory
documentation didn't get there,
but I've provided a URL here
at the bottom of the screen.
One additional note:
If you're a CFM application,
since currently there's no
way to get to services that
are in the system framework,
like the POSIX shared
memory and Semaphore APIs,
you're going to need to get to
them through CFBundle or a plug-in.
Basically,
there's two different ways of doing this.
One, you could use CFBundle to ask
for the address of a routine
in the system framework,
so you could inquire and then call that.
The other is you could factor
your application to use bundles
that are specific to a platform,
and we recommend doing this,
so that basically you have a Mako
plug-in on 10 that links with the system,
uses these APIs,
and then uses them to do the work.
you would just invoke the plugin.
Okay, that gets us over shared memory
and into the file manager.
The file manager is probably one
of the largest chunks of work that
we had to do over the last year.
The biggest disconnect,
or the biggest missing feature from the
file manager on 10 was support for these
volume formats that I have up here:
NFS, UFS,
and other POSIX-style volume formats.
Um...
Now,
why are these file formats important?
Basically,
this gives us a certain level of
interoperability that we've never
really had with a Mac before.
It's not just NFS and UFS,
it's anything that
complies to a POSIX API.
It's anything that,
if you went to the file system talk,
it plugs into the VFS layer.
And this is a bunch,
there's a bunch of opportunities here in
up-and-coming file systems that we really
wanted to be able to take advantage of.
The other point is that this wasn't
really an afterthought for us.
We were coming from an environment
that was heavily using UFS and NFS.
We were coming from the
Mac OS X server environment.
And as a matter of fact, internally,
we were using NFS and UFS very heavily.
To this date,
I keep my source code in my home
directory that's on an NFS server.
That's the way that I personally develop.
Other folks choose whatever they want to.
I do that mostly because I tend
to go from machine to machine,
and I like to have the
same kind of environment.
Keep my sources there locally,
they're backed up centrally.
That works beautifully on DP4.
But to do that,
we had to really look at how the file
manager talked to these kind of volumes.
For one,
the classic file manager APIs really
kind of assumed a volume format.
They were very HFS-centric.
[Transcript missing]
Two particular features of HFS.
One was forks, resource forks, the like.
Just the general concept that you
have more data associated with a
file than just that one data fork.
And then the other was the
idea of persistent file IDs,
basically the backbone
for aliases on HFS.
You have something similar
in UFS called an inode,
but it doesn't work the same way.
It isn't quite the same experience in
terms of something that's persistent.
We knew we had to support
these volume formats,
and what we settled on was basically
two different solutions in a sense.
One, we knew that the current APIs were
not very good for dealing with this,
and we actually had a luxury that
we rarely seen in the industry.
We actually had some time to make
sure that the set of APIs that
we call now HFS+ APIs worked
well with this environment.
The other thing that
we did is standardize.
We knew we had to store the extra
data that we're talking about,
the fork information and the file ID,
essentially the catalog
information from HFS.
We had to store that somewhere,
persistently.
So for that,
we chose the Apple double file format.
By dealing with these volume
formats by using Apple Double,
basically what we get
is the file manager API,
both the classic and the new HFS+ APIs,
deal with volumes transparently.
Even if they're underlying,
they may not have a catalog node or
they may not have a resource fork,
we store this in Apple Double format
so that the HFS and HFS+ APIs work
transparently across all of
these different volume formats.
Of course, we have support for the volume
formats that we're already
used to in Mac OS 8 and 9.
And almost all of these are on in DP4.
The only exception is UDF,
and that's coming.
In addition to the
different volume formats,
we had to deal with something,
two essentially foreign concepts.
One was the idea of mount points,
the idea that a volume can be mounted
or contained within another volume.
And the other is
symbolic links from Unix.
This work actually made its way into
DP3 and we've refined it since then.
But basically we came up with
a mechanism whereby both mount
points and symbolic links are
Show up to you through the
File Manager API as aliases,
that is files that have alias bits set.
They're not really alias files.
This information is synthesized.
This is one of the rare cases
in the File Manager where we
actually synthesize something.
Typically, we're giving you exactly
what's on the disk.
The other exception to that would be,
of course, the Apple double format.
We're not actually giving you
that information directly.
We're providing the extra information.
The way that you need to support
mount points and symbolic links on
OS X is just to respect the alias bit.
If you intend to resolve them,
to resolve them via
the resolve alias file.
You need to use that call
as opposed to other variants
because it isn't an alias file,
really.
Now, for those that are interested,
the reason we had to go this route is...
A very pervasive assumption that most
people have in dealing with file systems,
particularly in iteration,
is you're going through a
directory full of files,
You're not assuming that the VREF num,
which is sprinkled
throughout most of our APIs,
is going to change.
That is the case with AmountPoint,
and it's potentially the
case with the SimLink.
So, that's what got us to
a solution like this.
Okay, so the file manager is an area
we put a lot of effort into,
and I've told you about kind of the
differences in the file system on 10.
The one thing that I really want you
to come away from this session with
is there's really a lot of win in
OS X to go and use the HFS+ APIs.
The HFS+ APIs are very well
designed for this system.
There's one notion in particular in
the HFS+ APIs that really pays off,
and that's the ability to be very
specific about the information
that you want from the file.
So, using the HFS+ APIs and asking for
as little information or exactly the
information that you need is the best
solution on these volume formats that
don't support some of the things that
you may have become used to in HFS.
Uh... and then in particular you
really have to try this out for
yourself on these volume formats.
You can do that in DP4,
you can format a volume uh...
The first thing is to use UFS.
You can also, if you have NFS servers
in the general area,
you can mount them.
NFS or over a CD, the experience will be,
you'll be able to see it a lot easier
just because of the general performance
characteristics of those volume formats.
Okay,
so then the other thing I wanted to bring
up because people keep on hitting this
over and over as they bring their apps,
as they carbonize and
bring their apps to 10,
are some assumptions that are out there.
First is that VREF nums start at -1.
They typically don't start at
-1 on OS X in the file manager.
Really need to treat those
VREF nums as cookies.
We've run into a lot
of code that basically,
you know, it's quickly written code that
basically works on 8 and 9.
It's something like, you know,
looping between -1 and -10,
assuming that they're going
to find all volumes that way.
Use the volume calls to
iterate through volumes.
That'll prevent that
whole set of problems.
The other is the whole
notion of file IDs.
File IDs...
Like I said earlier,
are not available on some
of these volume formats.
On some of these volume formats,
what we have to revert to is
a path embedded in the alias.
This is essentially like a minimal alias.
You can treat them exactly the same way.
And on these volume formats,
with the current implementation,
the way it works on DP4,
they'll have some limitations.
They won't behave like a normal alias.
You can break aliases more
easily on these volume formats.
We'll be looking into things
that we can do to improve that.
But in particular,
changing an element of the path,
you know, renaming a directory somewhere
in the middle of the path is
going to break that alias.
Okay, so I spoke about this one concept
earlier that really helps out.
This is a tie-in to performance
and just working well on OS X.
And that's the notion that
you can be very specific about
the information that you want.
When asking for information for
a file using FSGit Catalog Info,
the HFS+ API for that,
if you just need the name of that file,
Then use the bitmap as an argument
and just say you want the name.
That's a very cheap way of
determining if the file is there.
The same kind of approach works
in some of these other cases.
When you're going through a directory,
what is it that you're really after?
Are you trying to just enumerate by name,
or are you trying to find
all files with an extension?
Are you trying to find only the
directories inside another directory?
These are all things that
can be set in the bitmap,
and doing so will really help.
In particular,
on a network volume like NFS,
where each one of those file
system operations ends up being
some kind of packet over the wire,
there's a certain amount
of non-determinism to that
on your typical network.
And volume iterations,
same thing goes for that.
Set the bitmap and ask for what you want.
Let's see,
this is actually an area where the advice
we gave you earlier on ended up biting
us a little bit in terms of performance.
So long ago we basically said
that the VCBQ is gone from Carbon.
You can't just get this low mem and
increment it and start walking through
volume control blocks that way.
The replacement technology for that
was use the volume iteration APIs.
Works fine.
When the volumes that
you're iterating over are,
for example, NFS volumes,
it doesn't work so well.
Again,
from a point of view of performance.
When you go through using
volume iteration calls,
you're asking for a lot of
data that often you don't want.
If you just wanted the name or you
wanted to get to the next V refnum,
You probably don't want
the size of the volume,
which can be very expensive to compute.
The size of blocks, things like that.
Some of the other information that
comes back in some of these calls has
always been cheap on HFS and HFS+.
Not so on some of these volume formats.
Again,
this is why you want to use fsgetvolinfo.
In addition,
there's a just getvolparams call,
which gives you a subset
of the same information.
Okay, I'm going to go through a
little bit of code here.
This should look familiar to most people.
This is your typical, you know,
go through a directory looking
for files in the directory.
The dot dot dot is just pseudo-code.
That's a little bit of setup.
Additional setup is not something
you would compile and work correctly.
You'll notice the main call
in a directory iteration,
this is the old file manager APIs,
is pbgetcat info sync, sync in this case.
You notice that basically as
you go through a directory,
you have to make this call for
every item in the directory.
Here's the replacement loop.
Notice first,
same kind of structure code, right?
A do-while loop, same kind of call,
you're asking for catalog info.
One big difference is it's a bulk call.
So you can ask for more than
one file information at a time.
The number of files is up to you.
It's actually a parameter for
the FSGit catalog info bulk.
So this is something that's tunable.
This is something that in DP4 works
down to a bulk call in the file manager,
but what we're going to do is actually
move that even further post-DP4,
make a better performance enhancement,
and move that call all the
way down to the kernel.
That'll give us the best efficiency.
So now I want to actually-- can
we get demo one up on stage?
I want to show you a quick demo
application that we brought together.
Just as an aside here,
This was, you know,
in the tradition of WWDC, done in,
I guess it was late last week now,
in a few hours.
But the surprise that we had was
actually a lot of folks on my team,
the low-level,
the Advanced Mac Toolbox team,
hadn't really had a chance to
seriously use Interface Builder.
We don't typically do those kinds
of things that have to do with
interface and bits on the screen.
And this was a...
Basically,
I was surprised to actually see Interface
Builder generating Carbon App in
almost no time flat without actually
having to understand some of the
new technologies that are there.
Okay, so what do I have here?
I have... Let me go and hide
this... Can I hide this?
John Iarocci, thank you.
Okay.
The top progress bar is the classic APIs,
the PBGetCatInfo sync
call that we just saw.
It's basically that loop.
The bottom is the newer call,
the bulk call.
Before I actually say go on this,
I wanted to bring up one other thing.
I wanted to do this in a pretty fair way.
I'll get to actually the way I went
about doing this a little bit later.
Basically, I decided to do both of
these tests on an MP thread.
Basically, the only difference between
the two executing is the kernel
time-slicing them appropriately.
Most of what these threads are
doing shouldn't take that long
in terms of... ...CPU processing.
They should go in and either
block very quickly because the
OS detects that the data in question
isn't there and they have to
actually get that from the device,
or rip right through that and just
fetch the next one if it's cached.
The other thing I want to bring
up is basically both of these,
the new and the old,
are both iterating through
two different directories.
So that you don't get any caching
effects from one disturbing the other.
And with that, I'll just let them go.
It's a fairly small directory,
roughly double the time.
The results are 65 ticks versus 31 ticks.
This is extremely exaggerated in
the case where you go on a CD,
a little bit less so on NFS,
and this is UFS on DP4.
And you see that doubling is
something that you can easily do.
One thing to note, though,
is it really will depend on the
contents of what's in the directory.
And that gets back to, you know,
are there resource forks?
Are there things that aren't easily
represented on the volume format?
Okay, can we get the slides back?
Okay, so we've talked about the
file manager again there.
The biggest advice I have
is to use the HFS+ APIs.
Now we're on to the folder manager.
The biggest change to the folder
manager for OS X has been to support
a concept that we call domains.
OS X supports a notion where
you have basically a system,
what we ship to you, that's read-only.
It's not modified by the user.
It's not typically modified
after it's shipped.
That's kind of like the base domain.
That's what you start with.
Above that is typically either a
network or a local domain where
you do install things in that
are shared by all applications,
by all users.
User Domain:
User Domain is roughly just for the user.
Things that apply to all
domains are preferences,
fonts, and fonts.
You don't want to use your own fonts.
Alternatively,
fonts could also be installed
in one of the other domains.
Actually,
domains have to do a lot with sharing.
The folder manager has been enhanced
to support these domains by using the
first parameter of the defined folder
instead of just supporting the refnums.
It also supports some
well-known domain constants.
It's important to note, though,
that there are some types of
things that the selectors that
the folder manager supports that
don't make sense in domains.
The two examples that I have here,
temporary items and trash.
Temporary items, for example,
is typically used when you
want to do some kind of
Well, the best case I have is when
you want to use PBXchange files,
you want to basically make sure that the
file in question that you're going to
save atomically is on the same volume,
right?
Trash is another case.
If that ended up being
in some different volume,
then you'd end up doing a
copy for trash and that's not
really what you wanted either.
So to check for the support of this,
you just have to check this Gestalt bit.
Folder Manager supports domains.
The other thing that I wanted to
bring up is you'll see a bullet
item on a lot of these slides.
Most of these lower-level technologies
have up-and-coming FSRef-based APIs.
If you had already started
on HFS+ conversion,
you may have ran into the fact that,
yeah, you're using HFS+ APIs,
but then when you have to ask
the folder manager for something,
it's in terms of an FS spec.
We're slowly taking HFS+ APIs.
My guess is for the public beta,
you'll have variant APIs in a
bunch of these technologies that
let you use them more directly.
Okay, resources.
There's been a lot of
questions about resources,
in particular,
are resource forks supported?
Very quickly, we'll go through the
chain management APIs.
These are things that have
been there since CarbonLib 1.0.
They allow an insertion and
removal of resources in the chain.
One thing to keep aware of on
OS X is that we actually support
file mapping of resource files.
That is,
we file map things that would be shared.
Things that roughly
equate to the system file.
And what that means to you is that
[Transcript missing]
This is very similar to a
ROM on older Macintoshes.
You might get ROM data in older Macs.
You'll probably end up
You can actually silently dereference
a handle to ROM data on OS X.
You won't be able to do that.
If you need that data,
if you want to modify that data,
you're going to have
to use Detach Resource.
And then the Resource Manager is
going to continue the trend and have
some FSRef-based APIs available.
There have been a lot of questions
about resource forks in CFBundle.
I guess the biggest thing here is
that basically because we want to
interoperate with other volume formats,
we've introduced an app
packaging specification that
doesn't use resource forks.
It uses resources in data forks.
Now why is that a good thing?
It's a good thing because that's
kind of a lowest common denominator
solution that transfers easily.
You can copy that off the web,
off of FTP,
you can copy it up to an NFS server,
copy it back without
having to modify tools,
without having to understand
about things like forks.
So there are some APIs that enable
this in the Resource Manager,
and this happens for you for free
for your application resources.
If you're packaged,
you'll basically get two DataFork
resource files open for you,
assuming you've localized your app, one,
if you haven't.
And then just in case you haven't
gotten to any of the CF talks,
if you need to get to anything
else within your application
that's been packaged,
just make sure you use the CFBundle APIs.
Okay, Code Fragment Manager.
There's been a big change we
were actually able to get in.
We hadn't planned on making
this available for DP4,
but we got far enough along that we did
get a preview of this technology in DP4.
It's not on by default.
You're going to have to go and enable it.
In the release notes on DP4
in the documentation folder,
there's a release note on
the Code Fragment Manager on
how to actually enable it.
One of the key features of the
work we've done on this is it
really helps with launch time.
Basically,
we were able to take a calculation
that happened at runtime previously,
make that occur at link time,
so that CFM launches are a lot
faster with this technology enabled.
The current default implementation
in Code Fragment Manager does
not support data exports.
This new one does.
In addition, because of the way in which
the work was done at link time,
we support lazy initialization
in the same way that DYLD does.
You do not pay the cost until you
actually use the library in question.
There are two particular issues on OS X.
Resource-based fragments
are not supported.
The workaround or the alternative to
doing that is actually handling whatever
you want to load from a resource yourself
by calling the resource manager and
then using memory fragments instead.
And then, in general,
shared data sections are not supported.
We already talked about
the velocity engine issue.
Okay, the process manager.
The process manager is fully
functional on the current release.
It's compatible with app packages.
There's been some confusion about this.
Basically, if we preserve the illusion in
the process manager that you
kind of have in the finder.
If you ask for the process information
of a process that is app packaged,
the spec associated with it, the FS spec,
is the spec to the .app, the .app.
The .app is the package,
not to the executable
contained within it.
However, we also support traditionally
packaged single file applications,
and that works pretty
much the same as it has.
Thread Manager.
Okay.
There's a couple things I want to get
through here on the Thread Manager.
One is that there's a lot of code
out there that goes through great
pains to make sure that they use
threads in a memory-savvy way.
They're trying to make sure they're not
using too much memory with their threads,
managing the stack sizes,
and things like that.
Most of that is unnecessary on 10.
Some of that you can't
really do very well on 10.
You can't really get the
stack size of another thread,
particularly if that thread happens
to be running on another processor.
This is just one of those kinds of
things that wasn't anticipated when
the original Thread Manager came along.
These threads and MP threads are
all layered on top of P threads.
In the Thread Manager case,
they're still completely cooperative.
So that is,
even though they're P-threads,
they all race for the same lock and
only one of them can run at the time.
The other problem that folks have
had with these kinds of threads
is that generally the way that you
schedule them is off of null events,
which doesn't really work very well
from a performance standpoint on 10.
We've talked about in the Carbon event
sessions and other sessions,
we really want you to be blocked
waiting for events to come in.
If you're blocked waiting
for events to come in,
then you can't really be calling
yield to any thread all the time.
That's part of the problem
with Thread Manager threads.
And of course, no concurrency.
However,
I do want to bring up that Thread
Manager is often the best solution
for your UI layer of your application.
Why is that?
Let me give this example.
If you are handling four
different windows with four
different preemptive threads,
and the user says,
"Command + W," the shortcut
for closing the window,
to all four windows,
what's going to happen if those threads
are preemptive is completely random.
There's not going to be any order.
You'll do it one time and all the
windows will shut in one order.
You do four command Ws again
and it'll be different.
This is not good for a decent,
predictable UI.
You do want cause and effect in your UI.
The best way to keep that is probably
something like cooperative threads
or even a single thread for your
UI and then have the backend of your
application use preemptive threads.
And that brings us to the MPA APIs.
I already mentioned that they're
layered on top of P-threads.
These are the APIs that we
really want to push you towards.
These are the APIs that
work preemptively on Carbon,
both on 9 and on 10.
One difference,
there's been some confusion on this,
is that MP constructs
are not system global.
That is to say, on a 9,
where everything works
in an address space,
an MPQ can be used to
talk between processes.
That's not the case on 10.
The MP package is a fairly
thin layer on top of P threads.
It's a per-process or
per-address space package.
Then I just want to refer you to
another release note on how to
use MP Create Tasks from CFM Maps.
It's also on the DP4 release.
And then I mentioned earlier
different thread-safe services.
These are the ones that we're
talking about right now.
Mostly file I/O networking,
that kind of thing.
One more thing about threading is
that the models between 9 and 10 are
Particularly different when
you're doing threading and I/O.
Something you want to look at
is if you're using cooperative
threads and a synchronous I/O.
That is not going to perform
as well as synchronous I/O and
preemptive threads on 10.
It'll still work,
but it's just not going to get your
last little bit of performance.
Okay, Apple Events.
Apple Events is basically the
only solution that we have for
cross-process IPC inside of Carbon.
There's been a little bit of,
there's been questions in the hallways
about this and things like that.
So if you need to do cross-process IPC,
this is the solution.
The other alternatives are
only available on 10 are CF,
Core Foundation allows for some
level of cross-process communication,
and then Mach messaging directly.
[Transcript missing]
Other than that,
they're a foundation technology.
They're being used throughout
all the frameworks:
Cocoa, Carbon, Classic.
One of the things I didn't mention
in the process manager is all the
applications within Classic actually
have an individual PSN,
so they're each uniquely
targetable that way.
Okay,
now I'd like to bring Steve Zellers up,
who's going to do an
Apple event-related demo.
[Transcript missing]
So here's my window over here with a
bunch of predefined searches and things.
And as I'm executing searches,
you can see that the database
over here connects to the server,
performs a search,
and then displays a search.
Now, that's obviously not something you
want your database to do all the time.
If this were a commercial database
like one of you would develop,
you would return the data
without updating the UI.
But you could do that in a background
application without having to
present the UI to the user at all.
So over here,
you can see the session transcript
of what the Perl script actually
told the command line tool
to send to the database.
It's over here, and what gets returned is
standard Apple script results,
which are in turn interpreted by the
Perl script and turned into HTML.
Let's do all searches at once,
because that's more interesting
to watch over there.
So as you can see,
you can put together a real application,
a real workflow,
using Carbon and your applications.
Okay, thanks, Steve.
Okay,
we're at the More Information section.
You've probably seen the
Carbon documentation URL,
but that's up there again.
The two release notes that I referred
to are on the DP4 release in
System Developer Documentation
Release Notes.
CarbonCore.html is going to go over some
of the issues that I mentioned with the
Memory Manager and CodeFragment Manager.
And then the CodeFragment Manager has
its own release note on how to
enable the new vector libraries.
And now that summary.
So HFS+ APIs, that's the big one.
Most of the applications that
we've seen have just been ported.
Not a lot of them have adopted HFS+ APIs.
Now there's even a bigger
reason to adopt these APIs.
And in particular,
using these APIs and using
multi-processing APIs for a factored
application is a very good proven
combination that's worked well on OS X.
So to get back to one of the
Carbon overview sessions,
Scott Forstall was actually
up there saying that he had
some challenges for you.
I have the same challenges and I'd
really like to see the development
community take us up on this.
In particular, with these core services,
we need feedback on things that may be
impacting you in terms of performance,
in terms of features.
We need things earlier rather than later.
Particularly these layers of the system,
we can't rev at the very last second
just because of the dependencies.
So I encourage you to
bring your app up on DP4.
Okay,
now I'd like to bring up a few of the
people on my team for some quick Q&A.
Actually, John, whoo-hoo.
We are out of time.
I'll wait to do a few questions.
I told them that you had a lot
of information and you did.
Okay.
Actually, it looks like we have -- well,
I better not -- I can't even
start it because of the -- Time.
Yeah.
Okay.
Well, I can take some questions.
We can probably go towards
the back over there.
Yeah.
So thank you all so much for
coming to this conference.
Again, the feedback that you've
given us is so great.
I know that Apple engineering has
been way encouraged by the show
and hopefully you have been too.
And we'll see you all next year.
Thanks.
♪ ♪